# Ruby Internals: How Refinements work

In this post I'll be taking a deep dive into the internals of MRI Ruby to find out exactly how the new Refinements feature works under the hood. I'm assuming you already have a general idea on what Refinements are. If not, take a look at [Magnus Holm's article on the topic](http://timelessrepo.com/refinements-in-ruby) for a good introduction.

Whenever I want to check out how Ruby implements something internally, I take an 'outside in' approach. I look at how the public API is implemented and then I work my way in from there.

This post will be working off the source code of `ruby-2.0.0-preview1`. If you'd like to follow along, [grab the source](http://ftp.ruby-lang.org/pub/ruby/2.0/ruby-2.0.0-preview1.tar.bz2) and open it up in your favourite text editor. If the indentation looks a little funny, make sure that your editor is configured with a tab width of 8.

## Module#refine

This is the first method talked about when introducing Refinements, so it makes sense that we start off here.

Ruby has a function called `rb_define_method` that takes 4 arguments - a Module on which the method will be defined, the name of the method as a C string, a function pointer to the method's implementation, and the arity of the method. Since the method name is passed as a C string, we can ack for the string `"refine"`. This turns up with one hit - line 1578 of `eval.c`:

    \c
    rb_define_private_method(rb_cModule, "refine", rb_mod_refine, 1);

One nice thing about the Ruby codebase is that functions are declared with a newline immediately before the name of the function, eg:

    \c
    static int
    foo(void* bar)
    {
        /* code code code */
    }

This makes searching for functions very easy. In the case of `rb_mod_refine`, acking for the regex `^rb_mod_refine` reveals that this function is defined on line 1217 of `eval.c`.

Let's work through this function in several pieces:

    \c
    static VALUE
    rb_mod_refine(VALUE module, VALUE klass)
    {

Methods implemented in C can have one of two different prototypes. Fixed arity methods (those taking a fixed number of arguments) take `self` as their first argument, and then an extra argument for every argument passed to the method. Since `Module#refine` takes 1 argument, the corresponding C function `rb_mod_refine` takes two.

However, if the method is variadic, it is passed the number of arguments as an `int` as its first argument, an array of `VALUE`s as its second argument, and `self` as its third.

    \c
        NODE *cref = rb_vm_cref();
        VALUE mod;
        ID id_refinements, id_refined_class;
        VALUE refinements;

Ruby is written in ANSI C, so all variable declarations must appear at the top of a function. Of particular note is the `cref` variable - this points to the scope of the enclosing module. For an overview of Ruby's scope/context situation, [read this article](http://yugui.jp/articles/846)

    \c
        if (!rb_block_given_p()) {
            rb_raise(rb_eArgError, "no block given");
        }
        check_class_or_module(klass);

This code performs some basic input validation. If `#refine` was not passed a block, this will raise an `ArgumentError`. Then, it ensures that `klass` is either a `T_CLASS` or `T_MODULE` and raises a `TypeError` otherwise.

    \c
        CONST_ID(id_refinements, "__refinements__");
        refinements = rb_attr_get(module, id_refinements);
        if (NIL_P(refinements)) {
            refinements = hidden_identity_hash_new();
            rb_ivar_set(module, id_refinements, refinements);
        }

This code gets `klass`'s refinements hash or creates it if it does not exist. This is roughly analogous to the Ruby code `@__refinements__ ||= {}`. 

Note that the `id_refinements` symbol does not begin with a `@` character. This creates a 'hidden' instance variable that is not accessible from Ruby-land. If you try to retrieve this ivar with `instance_variable_get`, a `NameError` will be raised.

The hash is also not an ordinary hash. Let's take a very quick detour into the implementation of the `hidden_identity_hash_new()` function:

    \c
    static VALUE
    hidden_identity_hash_new()
    {
        VALUE hash = rb_hash_new();
        
        rb_funcall(hash, rb_intern("compare_by_identity"), 0);
        RBASIC(hash)->klass = 0;  /* hide from ObjectSpace */
        return hash;
    }

An ordinary `Hash` object is created and the [`compare_by_identity`](http://www.ruby-doc.org/core-1.9.3/Hash.html#method-i-compare_by_identity) method is called on it. This method was only introduced in the 1.9 series and alters the behaviour of the hash so that it will compare objects by their `object_id`. This means that two objects at different locations in memory will be considered different, even if they would otherwise be considered equal. This can lead to interesting behaviour such as [equal string keys mapping to different values](http://eval.in/2393).

Finally, an internal flag is unset so that the object is inaccessible by Ruby code iterating through the `ObjectSpace`.

Back to `rb_mod_refine`...

    \c
        mod = rb_hash_lookup(refinements, klass);
        if (NIL_P(mod)) {
            mod = rb_module_new();
            CONST_ID(id_refined_class, "__refined_class__");
            rb_ivar_set(mod, id_refined_class, klass);
            rb_define_singleton_method(mod, "method_added",
                                       refinement_module_method_added, 1);
            rb_define_singleton_method(mod, "include",
                                       refinement_module_include, -1);
            rb_using_refinement(cref, klass, mod);
            rb_hash_aset(refinements, klass, mod);
        }

This section of the code is very similar to what we saw before, but with a little more complex initialisation.

The class being refined is looked up in the `refinements` hash. If it isn't found, a new anonymous module is created to hold the refined methods for the class. This way, refinements can *sort of* be thought of as mixins that are automatically mixed in and out depending on scope. The `__refined_class__` instance variable (another one of those 'hidden' ivars) is set on the anonymous module to the class being refined.

Two singleton methods are defined on the anonymous module - `method_added` and `include`.

`method_added` is hooked up to the C function `refinement_module_method_added()` which is mostly boring and involves invalidating some optimizations YARV does. This probably shouldn't be done this way since if `method_added` is redefined and the new definition does not call `super`, Ruby can behave incorrectly. I've posted [an example of this](https://bugs.ruby-lang.org/issues/7290) to the Ruby issue tracker.

`include` is redefined on the module to another implementation that behaves properly inside a refinement. We'll discuss this later on. TODO TODO TODO TODO ACTUALLY DISCUSS THIS.

`rb_using_refinement` is called with the `cref` we talked about earlier, the class being refined, and the anonymous module. This is to make sure refined methods can be used within the refinement without an explicit `using`.

The newly created anonymous module is then inserted into the `refinements` hash to allow this particular refinement to be reopened later on.

    \c
        rb_mod_module_eval(0, NULL, mod);
        return mod;
    }

Finally, `rb_mod_module_eval` is called. This is the C function implementing `Module#module_eval`. Because this function is called directly, bypassing the Ruby call machinery, the block passed to `Module#refine` is also accessible by `Module#module_eval`. We talked about Ruby's variadic method calling convention earlier, and here's an example of it! Since no arguments are passed to `Module#module_eval`, it is save to pass a null pointer as `argv`.

It's interesting that `Module#refine` returns the anonymous module itself instead of the last value evaluated inside the block, as `#module_eval`, `#class_eval`, `#instance_eval`, as well as class and module definitions do. I'm not sure if this is by design or if this is an accidental inconsistency.
